Author: Abhishek Balaji
Date of creation: 10-05-2025 / 17:25 pm

What is docker?

Docker is a container engine

It performs 3 main functions
a) It packages application
b) It includes everything necessary for functioning
c) Compatible with other operating systems

To better understand docker, first we need to understand what monolithic architecture and microservices are?

What is a monolithic architecture?

Consider a web application, when we deploy all the modules into a single unit of production code. It is called monolithic architecture. 
Each and every module contains a relationship with other modules in the production code. There exists a strong dependency between them. 

A better way to conclude this, it is the housing of all modules together with interdependencies among each other in the production code. This approach in software development design is called monolithic arachitecture

What are micro-services?

In micro-services architecture, the entire application code (production code) is broken down into several parts. Where it can be developed, deployed, and managed as seperate services

One of the drawbacks of monolithic architecture is that, due to internal dependencies between modules. Even if one module experiences an issue the entire application code is at risk of failure.
A single bug can compromise the entire application

What is virtualization?

It is the practice of creating a virtual eco-system that contains multiple virtual machines where each VM is running its own operating system. All of this is managed by the hypervisor. The main purpose of the hypervisor is used to allocate and distribute virtual hardware resources to numerours virtual machines based on their needs and requirements.

There are 2 types of virtualization:

a) Bare-metal hypervisors
b) Hosted Hypervisors

What is containerization?

Containerization is a technology that packages and deployes application code fragments into individual services on isolated containers. Each service handling a specific function and communicating with each other forming the entire application.

I use Ubuntu OS, to install the software package execute the code below

update the existing system packages using the sudo apt update -y command

Once done, go ahead and install the docker application using the following command

sudo apt install docker.io -y

To check whether the service is actively running or not

sudo systemctl status docker

To start running the service, use this command

sudo systemctl start docker

To check the version, run this command

docker --version

# log-2 11-05-2025 / 19:44 PM

* What is docker?

Docker is a tool that allows users/developers to package fragments of application code and their dependencies into a single container that is compatible to run on any operating system

* Docker performs 3 critical functions. They are as follows:

  a) Docker packages the fragmented application code
  b) Along with dependencies required for the application code to run smoothly, all in one container
  c) Compatible to run on any operating system (Windows, Linux, Mac)

* What is Monolithic Architecture?

Based on what I learnt, monolithic architecture refers to the application code (final production code) is combined into one single unit. This approach to application development is called monolithic architecture  

One thing to note is that, when you have various other modules tightly coupled together (strong dependency). Even if one module faces an issue, the entire application code is compromised.

An alternative approach to overcome this problem was later introduced in 2015 called the concept of containerization

* What is containerization?

Containerization is the practice of packaging code and dependencies into a single container that is capable of running on various operating systems

* Some docker terms every beginner needs to be aware about

  1) Container - A container is a light-weight, isolated space for running the application code.
  2) Docker Image - A docker image contains the blueprint for what will be housed inside the container. In order to create a container, a docker image needs to be created first.
  3) Docker file - A docker file can be taught of a text file that can be used to illustrate the steps involved to create the docker image
  4) Docker engine - It is the core component required to create, build, and run containers





